<p>This is an entry from my journal.</p>

<hr />

<p>Local time is 05:40.  It is still night outside.  The sun will take
another two hours to reach my hut.  I just got home from a walk.
These are the coldest moments of the day, as we are far withdrawn from
the last sunlight.  The quarter moon is high in the sky, accompanied
by stars, forming the familiar sacred symbol.  People have been
marvelling at these phenomena for millennia.  They were there before I
walked this earth and will continue to be there after I die.</p>

<p>In our subjective experience, everything revolves around us.  Not
because we necessarily have an obsession with our self.  It is how
events register in relation to the constant of a sensing being.  When
trees grow to point towards the sun, they do it relative to their
position.  When predators chase their prey, they do it out of their
own hunger, not some global metric.  I do not have the conscience to
co-feel the lived experience of greater systems, such as the earth or
the galaxy at-large, though I expect every form of life in this cosmic
continuum to exhibit subjectivity relative to other factors in the
given case.</p>

<p>Walking in nature rewilds me.  Not in the sense of making me more
wolf-like.  I remain as peaceful as ever.  It rather brings me closer
to the essentials of the human condition.  I have overcome the need to
pursue goals of other people.  This past weekend, for example, there
were lots of folk in the nearby villages, yet none ventured outdoors.
All they do is gather at closed spaces where they continue to compete
with each other over appearances.  Will they achieve anything in the
end?  No.  Will I?  No.  The difference is that I am not participating
in this competition, do not feel compelled to act accordingly, and
feel no angst whatsoever about my presence.</p>

<p>I am here the same way the grass is and will wither away when my
seasons change.  Differences are of degree, not substance.  I do not
feel sorry for not competing with others.  This is who I am.  I no
longer have a need to apologise to people for not behaving like them
or, anyhow, for not having the motivation to fit in with their group.
If I ever fit in with someone, it will be a fellow traveller.  I have
accepted my nature and am at peace with myself.</p>

<p>When I go for a walk, I am not heading anywhere in particular.  Much
like my life, I experience spontaneity within the overarching
constraints of my existence.  I want to remain healthy, for example,
and so make choices towards that goal.  Why do I want this end
though?  Because I am intrinsically active and heed the inner call to
find outlets for my exuberance.  Sure, it feels like a choice and I
cannot live it otherwise, though I still reason that the choosing
subject is a function of factors beyond and prior to it, much like
this exuberance of mine that I never opted for.</p>

<p>If there is a kernel of volition, it is made manifest in the fact that
I set general rules which start out as directives until they are
ultimately embedded in my modus operandi as inextricable from my core
being.  When I decided to quit so-called “soft drinks” two decades
ago, I did not do so with the express objective of achieving something
quantifiable.  For example, I did not foresee that I would have the
stamina to hike for hours without even taking water with me.  This is
an antecedent realisation and acquired taste that has come about
organically.  It is built on those past hard decisions and concomitant
patterns of behaviour, which themselves were limited in scope to a
generic pursuit of an immediate end: to quit as a good in itself or,
perhaps, to quit in order to prove to myself the capacity of quitting
and of remaining abstinent from that habit.</p>

<p>Volition may then be this fountain of sponteneity which is itself
framed by magnitudes it cannot affect.  What one does is not what
others do.  Each is a unique configuration of factors in states of
affairs that evolve and thus in cases that keep getting reconstituted.
My tranquillity is not that of another.  It is bespoke.</p>

<p>Inner peace is not a goal in itself.  I did not set out to achieve it,
just how I do not plot out the course of my hikes.  I am equanimous as
a result of alleviating myself from external pressures to perform,
from the heteronomy of fitting in.  Like being “successful”, for
example.  If we go by the social standard, I am not a successful man.
No fancy pedigree, no illustrious career, no material markers of
superficial happiness.  Yet I am living in ataraxia.</p>

<p>Someone once remarked something along the lines of “how can this
genius not be at the finest universities?”, expecting me to do
something about it, I guess.  I felt bad at the time.  Why wasn’t I
satisfying the social expectations?  Was I a big failure of a man?  I
had not yet accepted myself back then.  It would take a few more years
to overcome those inhibitions of self-denial, of listening more to
others than to the muses.  Though I knew that in my subjective world,
I am just me, not “this genius”.  I have no notion of what geniuses
do, nor do I care to find out.  All I can do is pursue what my
condition renders possible.</p>

<p>Suppose I went down that path of being lauded as a genius in public.
I would have been miserable.  My spontaneity would have been
sacrificed to the altars of cultural rigidity.  Instead of going on
open-ended walks, I would be speeding down a one-way street, without
the freedom to explore my surroundings, to pause and take stock of the
details, of the shrubs and the lizards.  None of this matters in a
society that has moved away from the natural rhythms.  Whereas I am at
peace when I stand at the edge of a mountain, drawing inspiration from
the open vistas.</p>

<p>I cannot tell the average modern person how to accept their self,
because they think in terms of business transactions and material
possessions.  One may not buy or own tranquillity.  There is no
special clothing that will give it to you.  No land or institution
that will miraculously relieve you from your disturbance.  It springs
from within as the product of concerted efforts at aligning the mind
with the body and the environment.  Those who spend their life
performing the role of another, be it genius or whatnot, are compelled
by cultural norms to never contemplate the little things.  They tend
to one or but a few facets of their being, be it intellectual or
carnal, though are lacking harmony.  Like days without a night, their
intensity is not balanced out by calmness.</p>

<p>I am no more special than these grapevines.  What would I do if I knew
this was my last day alive?  The same as every day: be spontaneous in
how I interpret and apply my rules, with no regret for being who I am,
with no fear of growing and changing, so long as I remain open to the
cosmos.  As the light fills this valley, I continue with my daily
activities, not expecting anything in return.  There is no
enlightenment for, no salvation, no bargaining with fate.  If there is
another present, it is for that presence in its prevailing conditions
and with its subjectivity to cope with the phenomena.  Why should I
assume that my being has the clarity to decide for another presence?
Everything I do here amounts to nothing I can definitively prove as
purposeful, while every lofty telos we fathom is trivial as it
revolves around the preservation of something familiar.  If there is a
grand purpose and design to be drawn, it is for an exalted being to
specify.</p>